Things can go wrong when we try to sign up with an e-mail that already exists for example and Firebase
actually gives us back a message that kind of gives us an idea what might have failed. By the way in the
official docs, you also get some example errors you could get back,
for example e-mail exists or for signing in, you could also get back e-mail not found, invalid password,
things like that. So you might want to handle these errors or at least have some generic error handling
process in place
and I will handle these errors by throwing my own error if something goes wrong. For that here in the
auth.dart file in the providers folder, in authenticate where we send that request, where we do get an
error in the end if something fails,
I want to wrap that here with try catch and you learned about that before, right? So here, I'll just take
this, get rid of the print statement in here actually, wrap this into try and catch any error I might be getting
here and in here, simply rethrow that error.
Now we would get an error here if Firebase returns us a response with an error status code or if
we have no network connection or anything like that.
The problem with Firebase here is that this response actually is not an error response,
it doesn't have an error status code and therefore, you learned that for post and get, the HTTP
package would normally throw an error
if your response has an error status code,
therefore this does not happen here because our response has a 200 status code but simply contains a
body that indicates that we have an error.
Now that's not too common,
you might be working with an API that actually gives you an error status code
if something goes wrong and therefore here, you might end up in the catch block and implement your
logic here.
Now for me here, I have to check the response inside of try here and see if it, even though it's 200, is
a 200 code, if it contains an indicator that we have an error and we see thankfully how an error
response would look like
regarding the response body, that's what we get here.
So here, I want to add an if check and check if my response and there actually, the extracted body, so I'll
store this in a separate constant to make my code a bit more readable. So my response data is json.decode
response body,
we could have done all of that in one line,
I just use two lines here to make it easier to read.
So I want to check if my response data has an error key because here we see we have an error key if
we have an error.
So if this is not equal to null or put in other words, if it exists, then we know even though we have
a 200 status code, we have a problem.
So in here, I want to throw my own exception and thankfully, I built this HTTP exception class here in the
last course module.
So let's import that from the models folder, there from the http_exception.dart and it's a simple exception
class which we can throw here, HttpException and pass in a message. The message I want to pass
in can also be extracted from Firebase response. In the error key,
we have another nested map and in that map here, we have a message key which contains that identifier
that Firebase gives us which is useful.
So there, as a message to my exception here, I'll forward response data, then access the error key and then
in that inner map, the message key to basically forward that identifier that Firebase gives me as part
of the exception I throw.
Now what's the idea behind throwing an exception here?
Well we can of course now manage or handle that exception in the AuthScreen which is where we're in
the widget and where we can present something to the user, show an alert to the user for example.
So here on the AuthScreen, we can now wrap our entire if else block here in a try
catch block because either of these two actions could fail, both signing up and logging in can
fail so
we want to wrap that in a try block and now I'll use a different version of that catch method, instead
of catching any error,
I'll check if I got a specific kind of error and we do that with the onKeyword here.
So on
and then you specify the class, the type of class, the type of exception you want to handle.
I want to handle my own HTTP exception, so therefore we first of all have to import that from the models
folder and the http_exception.dart file
and with that import added up there, down here we can check onHttpException,
then catch the error,
so we still have catch error here but we filter the errors
we want to catch basically
and then you can still also have a generic catch error after that to catch any errors which are not
of type HTTP exception,
so for example errors that occur because you lost the network connection or anything like that. But the
custom HTTP exception, which in my case, in this scenario here is only thrown if we failed validation of
the data
basically, that will be handled here in this special catch block.
Now why do I do it like that?
Why do I have two catch blocks? because I want to show it to you,
I want to show you this filtering mechanism and because I want to show a different message based on
which error occurred.
My error message down there should simply be could not authenticate you, please try again later because
maybe we had no Internet connection, maybe Firebase was down,
we don't know,
so that's the message we'll use there and I'll work on displaying it in a second.
The message up here is different, there
I also have my default error message where we could also say authentication failed and yes you could
of course therefore merge both blocks together kind of
but again, I also want to show this filtering.
So here that's my default message but now, I want to check what's inside the error
and please remember that we pass a message into our exception here.
We do that in the auth.dart file in providers, we pass that identifier Firebase gives us,
so that's inside of the exception and that's what we catch here in the end.
So now we can add a switch statement here and switch on our error message here or simply on error to
string which also, thanks to our method here, returns the message.
So we want to switch the value that's stored in there
and then here, we can define different cases where we want to alter that message.
Now the thing is Firebase doesn't always provide a clean identifier like this,
sometimes it's also a short sentence where this identifier is included and a switch statement will look
for exact matches,
so I will actually work with a couple of if statements instead.
If you had an API that gives you clear identifiers and always the same structure of identifier, then
you could absolutely use a switch statement, here
I'll use an if statement instead and check my error to string,
so what is stored in here and call contains on that. Every string has the contains method where you can check
whether in that string, you have a certain word or a certain term is included and here for example, we
can check for e-mail exists and if that is true, then we know that we have that identifier, at least included
in a sentence if it's more than one word
and then I know that my error message here should actually be overwritten and that's why I use var instead
of final
and it should now be this e-mail address exists or is already in use maybe. Else if the error to string
call here contains let's say invalid e-mail which is another identifier Firebase gives you, you could
set the error message to this is not a valid e-mail address. Yet another check we can do here is error
to string contains and check for the weak password identifier which would be thrown if you somehow sneak
in a password that's shorter than six characters, then you could return a message where you say this
password is too weak. Of course by the way, you don't have to implement such a detailed error handling,
I just want to demo this, if you want something like this for your app or not is of course for you to
decide.
So besides the weak password, we can also check for e-mail not found, another identifier Firebase might
return for logging in in that case,
here we could have an error message of could not find a user with that e-mail and my last else if
case here is that I compare or that I check my error message here with contains for invalid password,
so in case we entered a wrong password, then we can return invalid password as a message here.
Now if we make it into neither of these blocks here because we have some other error, some other identifier,
then this default message here will be taken. Now down there, we only have one message and therefore
we can actually also turn this into a const,
it's a compile time constant, it will never change
and now the question is, how do we output that message?
For that, we can simply show a dialog.
Now of course I only want to show the dialog if we have an error,
so here we could add a new method in this class which returns nothing let's say
which I name
_showErrorDialog where I expect to get my message that should be shown as an argument and then in
here, we can call show dialog.
You need to provide a context here and as you learned, context is available everywhere in the state class
and you need to provide a builder and in that builder, you get a newly generated context
and there you can return your alert dialog and in that alert dialog, you can have a title of which is
a text widget actually or should be a text widget of an error occurred,
something like this
and then of course also have some content in there and the content now simply is a text widget
that wraps our message
and obviously you can now also add some actions here, some FlatButtons if you want to, where you say OK or
you offer more options if you want to, I'll just add an OK button here and if that is pressed, I'll simply
call navigator of ctx pop to close that dialog.
So now we can call this showErrorDialog method and forward our message to show such a dialog to the
user.
So here in both onHttpException catch as well as just catch, at the end,
I'll call showErrorDialog and forward the error message. With that,
we should hopefully show a dialog if we have an error.
Now one other thing I of course also want to do, I want to make sure that the loading spinner goes away
and that should already happen because we're setting the state to isLoading false after the entire
try catch block,
so even if we have an error, after all of that, this code will execute and the loading spinner should
therefore be removed.
Let's maybe do a hot refresh to reload our app entirely here and then let's try signing up a user with
an e-mail address that already exists.
So let's go to sign up here, confirm the password, click sign up
and we see this e-mail address is already in use.
Now let's try
another e-mail address,
so this should now succeed actually if we sign up,
yes looks better.
Let's try
logging in now with a user that exists,
we just created it but with a wrong password,
actually I should enter a longer password so that my local validation succeeds
but now invalid passwords,
that's looking good. Let's try
maybe a correct password but an e-mail which doesn't exist and login, could not find a user. So that seems
to work
and with that, we got error handling in place,
we can now continue and make sure that if we do succeed with sign up or login, we actually move on to
the shop instead of showing this login screen.